TOM SCOT: I'm here for the Junior Winter Olympics
in Lillehammer, Norway.
It's still the beginning of the season,
so they use snow machines.
It is not easy to meet the requirements for the slopes.
ROGER HJELMSTADSTUEN: Here in Haifel we have about 250 cannons for snow
All of them are controlled by one place.
and all are connected.
It is most important to put the machines in the right places.
Otherwise the wind can bear the snow outside the track.
That's why it's working twice a day in two shifts
all winter, all winter, to make sure everything is perfect.
TC: In the snow machine, huge amounts of water and air
are injected through miniature nozzles,
creating a fine fog that turns into snow.
But although it's cold,
the temperature is actually not below zero.
Then how does the water freeze?
Why does not it just rain like rain?
All right. Physics.
When the water evaporates, it takes heat from the environment in which it is located.
If you wet your hand and blow it on it,
you will feel cold,
because the evaporating water takes away heat from your body.
This is happening here as well.
Some of these water droplets evaporate
and so the temperature around them falls.
Which means other droplets may freeze.
Once this happens, the so-called crystallisation centers,
from which snowflakes are born.
And if the machine does not do well enough,
one type of protein slurry can be used.
It is added in very small quantity to the water
and then each droplet becomes the center of crystallization
and can form its own snowflake.
RH: To make snow, we need water and air pipes.
Each machine must also be connected to a data cable.
The water here comes from large lakes on the top of the mountain,
from where it goes down without the need for extra pressure.
This is easiest and cheapest.
We usually use about 30,000 liters per minute.
It sounds like a lot of water, but we have a very large lake.
So during the season his level drops by no more than 5-10 cm.
And that is, if it is not filled from nowhere.
So most of the time your lake looks the same way.
TC: The drier the air, more water can evaporate into it.
So if the air is very, very dry - 0% humidity,
can produce snow and when the air temperature
is well above zero - up to 6 ° C.
But if the air is damp, it is not possible to evaporate all these droplets.
At 100% humidity, when the air is saturated,
the temperature should be at least -2 ° C to form snow.
This is not a magical freezer machine.
The laws of thermodynamics make this impossible.
However great it would be for snow machines to work in the middle of the summer,
what we would get then ...
... is a machine for rain.
RH: Good snow cover is very important for big races,
but it is also very important for
the ordinary skiers here in Hafiel.
We need snow to have slopes.
Without him we are nothing. There's no snow!
TC: There are still many videos on the Olympic channel,
as well as on my channel - watch them and subscribe.
And I thank the Junior Olympic Games
about the opportunity to come here to Lillehammer.
Translation: WG